---
page_ref: "@ARK_PROJECT__VARIANT@/agnostic-apollo/sudo/releases/1/v1.0.0.html"
---

# sudo v1.0.0 - 2025-03-21

## Changelog

**Commit history:** [`v0.2.0...v1.0.0`](https://github.com/agnostic-apollo/sudo/compare/v0.2.0...v1.0.0)

&nbsp;



### Added

- Add log level `VVVERBOSE` for tests and change log level and format for entries.

- Add homepage and SPDX-License-Identifier to scripts.

- Add release docs and move changelogs to dedicated version release files.

- Add developer docs for building, contribute and test.

- Add install docs  

    The `#!/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/bin/bash` shebang for `com.termux` package has been replaced with the linux `#!/usr/bin/bash` shebang so that `sudo` from `master` branch and GitHub releases works for termux forks or a different rootfs path. The install docs have been updated with the instructions to run `termux-fix-shebang` on installation so that required shebang gets replaced as per Termux environment of the running device.  

- Init new site design for project, docs and release info  

    `README.md` has also been added back that was previously move to usage docs.  

- Add `github_release_build` workflow to automatically upload `sudo` and its checksum file to a release when its published.

- **!** Set `SUDO__TERMUX_ROOTFS`, `SUDO__TERMUX_HOME` and `SUDO__TERMUX_PREFIX` to be used by `sudo.config`  

    Previously, `$TERMUX_HOME` was used by `sudo.config`, which should be replaced with `$SUDO__TERMUX_HOME` in user config files as it may not be set in future versions.  

    Also added check to abort if sourcing `sudo.config` failed.  

- Export `$TERMUX__ROOTFS`, `$TERMUX__HOME` and `$TERMUX__PREFIX` environment variable as per paths found with `termux_bash__get_termux_scoped_env_variable` and only export `$PREFIX` if its already exported to an absolute path. 

    Termux app will deprecate `$PREFIX` from version `>= 0.119.0` and will add an option to not export it all in future. Users and external programs should rely on `$TERMUX__PREFIX` instead of `$PREFIX` as that may conflict with other programs.  

- Do not use hardcoded `com.termux` paths and use `TERMUX_` scoped environment variables for getting termux paths under rootfs, add support termux-packages build infrastructure and replace `TERMUX_FILES` references with `TERMUX_ROOTFS`  

    The Termux app version `>= v0.119.0` (yet to be released) will export path environment variables like `$TERMUX_ROOTFS`, `$TERMUX_HOME` and `$TERMUX_PREFIX` under the `TERMUX_` env root scope (`$TERMUX_ENV__S_ROOT`). We use these dynamic paths instead of relying of hardcoded `com.termux` paths, which will not work if Termux is compiled for a different rootfs or for a fork. In future, multiple rootfs support may be added in Termux app as well.  

    If running in Termux app version `< 0.119.0` where env variables are not exported:  
    - If using `sudo` compiled with termux-packages build infrastructure, then use placeholder values replaced during build time, with a fallback to hardcoded `/data/data/com.termux/*` paths.  
    - If using `sudo` compiled on-device with `make` or downloaded from `master` branch or GitHub releases, then use hardcoded `/data/data/com.termux/*` paths.  
    If running in Termux app version `>= 0.119.0` where env variables are exported:  
    - If using `sudo` compiled with termux-packages build infrastructure, then use env variables, with a fallback to placeholder values replaced during build time.  
    - If using `sudo` compiled on-device with `make` or downloaded from `master` branch or GitHub releases, then use env variables, with a fallback to hardcoded `/data/data/com.termux/*` paths.  

    The hardcoded `com.termux` paths refers to `/data/data/com.termux/*` paths for the current Termux app (https://github.com/termux/termux-app) for the `com.termux` app package name, but such paths will not work for termux forks or for multiple rootfs.  

    Settings variables is handled by the `termux_bash__get_termux_scoped_env_variable` function, which is taken from the `termux-get-termux-scoped-env-variable` util provided by the `termux-core-package` package. The `@*@` placeholders like `@TERMUX__ROOTFS@` have been added so that they are replaced during build time by the build infrastructure through the `Makefile`. Check https://github.com/termux/termux-core-package/blob/master/site/pages/en/projects/docs/usage/utils/termux-get-termux-scoped-env-variable.md for more info.  

    Termux files/base directory is also now referred as the rootfs by the Termux app and build infrastructure.  

- Add support of Android 5/6 and the `-A`, `-AA`, `-t` `-T`, `-TT` priority flags and change `path` command and fix `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH` behaviour  

    - On android `6`, possibly `5` as well, writing to fd path `$SUDO_TEMP_DIRECTORY_FD` in `sudo_setup_sudo_temp_directory()` with `printf` fails with `text file busy` error inside the the root user `su` shell (`$SU_ENV_COMMAND`), where the fd path was opened in the termux user shell in `sudo_setup_sudo_shell_home_and_working_environment_wrapper()` before starting the `su` shell. So passing data with a fd is not possible between termux and root user, so a temp file is used under `$TMPDIR` for Android `< 7` with the name `.sudo.temp.path.XXXXXX`.  
    - The `-A`, `-AA`, `-t` `-T`, `-TT` priority flags have been added, in addition to the already existing `-a` flag. This allows easily running commands specific to termux or android bin paths to have a consistent experience with them. Check the updated docs for each command type for their behaviour and the https://github.com/agnostic-apollo/sudo#path-and-ld_library_path-priorities and https://github.com/termux/termux-packages/wiki/Termux-execution-environment docs for more info.  
      - To ensure only binaries under `$TERMUX__PREFIX/bin` directory are executed, pass the `-T` flag. This will have consistent behaviour with shells starts by the Termux app.  
      - To ensure only binaries under any `termux` directory (`$TERMUX__PREFIX/bin` or `$TERMUX__PREFIX/bin/applets`) are executed, pass the `-TT` flag.  
      - To ensure only binaries under `/system/bin` directory are executed, pass the `-A` flag.  
      - To ensure only binaries under any `android` bin directory are executed, pass the `-AA` flag. This will have consistent behaviour with shells starts by android `adb` (https://developer.android.com/tools/adb).  
      - While running in a shell as the `termux` user, to run a single `android` system command as the `root` user, use the `path` command with the `-A` or `-AA` flag as `sudo -A <command>`, like `sudo -A ls -lhdZ .` to execute `/system/bin/ls`.  
    - The `path` command previously set priority automatically if command path was under `/system` partition, but there are other system paths under which system/non-termux binaries may exist, like `/apex`, `/vendor`, `/product` paths or under `/sbin` and `/system/xbin` directories, and their dynamic linking may fail if `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH` contains `$TERMUX__PREFIX/lib`, as they rely on linker using default system library paths instead. So now, for `path` command, if priority flags are not passed, then priority is given to `termux` paths followed `android` paths if executable `canonical` path is under `$TERMUX__ROOTFS` directory (like `-t` flag), otherwise to `android` paths followed `termux` paths (like `-a` flag).  
    - The android `bin` paths are exported as per AOSP for each android version to have a consistent experience with normal app environment and `adb` shell.  
    - The `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH` variable is no longer exported for Android `>= 7` as Termux uses `DT_RUNPATH` and it causes the linker error `CANNOT LINK EXECUTABLE` for certain commands, like `ffmpeg`. However, it is exported for Android `< 7` for priority flags for which termux bin paths exist in `$PATH`.  

- Add docs to advise against piping `su` and `sudo` output to other commands and using script `-s` command type instead.

- Add support for `--only-bash-tests` to run only bash tests for `sudo_tests`  

    Bash tests cover most of the logical tests and does not require installing packages of additional shells and utilities that are tested.  

- Add `/debug_ramdisk/su` to `su` search paths, and ensure `su` binary selected after searching supports the `-c` option, and add support for custom path with `$SUDO_SU_PATH` env variable and `--su-path` option  

    The order for `su` search paths has been changed too. Check docs added in `README` for more info.  

    The `/debug_ramdisk/su` path is required as its the source path for the `tmpfs` mount done at `/system/bin/sh` by `Magisk`. Other Magisk forks may not do the `tmpfs` mount, like it was removed for `Kitsune Mask` `vR65976974` and then reverted in `vR65C33E4F`.  

    - https://web.archive.org/web/20240109161543/https://github.com/HuskyDG/magisk-files/releases/tag/R65976974-kitsune  
    - https://web.archive.org/web/20240220115005/https://github.com/HuskyDG/magisk-files/releases/tag/1707294287  

## &nbsp;

&nbsp;



### Changed

- **!** Use `SUDO__` scoped environment variables for `sudo.config`, and `SUDO_SCRIPT__` scoped environment variables and `sudo_script__` scoped files/functions for `script` command  

    Following environment variable scopes have been renamed that may be defined in `sudo.config` file or exported before running `sudo`.  

    - `$SUDO_SHELL_HOME` to `$SUDO__SHELL_HOME`  
    - `$SUDO_POST_SHELL_HOME` to `$SUDO__POST_SHELL_HOME`  
    - `$SUDO_SHELL_PS1` to `$SUDO__SHELL_PS1`  
    - `$SUDO_POST_SHELL_PS1` to `$SUDO__POST_SHELL_PS1`  
    - `$SUDO_ADDITIONAL_PATHS_TO_EXPORT` to `$SUDO__ADDITIONAL_PATHS_TO_EXPORT`  
    - `$SUDO_EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_PATH_VARIABLE` to `$SUDO__EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_PATH_VARIABLE`  
    - `$SUDO_ADDITIONAL_LD_LIBRARY_PATHS_TO_EXPORT` to `$SUDO__ADDITIONAL_LD_LIBRARY_PATHS_TO_EXPORT`  
    - `$SUDO_EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_LD_LIBRARY_PATH_VARIABLE` to `$SUDO__EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_LD_LIBRARY_PATH_VARIABLE`  
    - `$SUDO_SHELLS_AUTOMATICALLY_CREATE_RC_FILES` to `$SUDO__SHELLS_AUTOMATICALLY_CREATE_RC_FILES`  
    - `$SUDO_SHELLS_AUTOMATICALLY_CREATE_HISTORY_FILES` to `$SUDO__SHELLS_AUTOMATICALLY_CREATE_HISTORY_FILES`  
    - `$SUDO_SHELLS_HISTORY_ENABLED` to `$SUDO__SHELLS_HISTORY_ENABLED`  
    - `$SUDO_SU_PATH` to `$SUDO__SU_PATH`  
    - `$SUDO_LOG_LEVEL` to `$SUDO__LOG_LEVEL`  

    Following environment variable scopes have been renamed that are exported for the `sudo -s` `script` command. Their names have been changed as well for clarity of their function, like exit code and pid is for the `core_script` passed, and not for the `script` command as a whole.  

    - `$SUDO_SCRIPT_DIR` to `$SUDO_SCRIPT__TEMP_DIR`  
    - `$SUDO_SCRIPT_EXIT_CODE` to `$SUDO_SCRIPT__CORE_SCRIPT_EXIT_CODE`  
    - `$SUDO_SCRIPT_PID` to `$SUDO_SCRIPT__CORE_SCRIPT_PID`  

    Following file name scopes have been renamed that are created for the `sudo -s` `script` command.  

    - `sudo_core_script` to `sudo_script__core_script`  

    Following function name scopes have been renamed that are exported for the `sudo -s` `script` command for exit traps.  

    - `sudo_script_trap` to `sudo_script__trap`  
    - `sudo_script_custom_trap` to `sudo_script__custom_trap`  
    - `sudo_remove_temp_directory` to `sudo_script__remove_temp_directory`  

- Move license text to licenses/agnostic-apollo__sudo__MIT.md file and update LICENSE to debian copyright format  

    - https://www.debian.org/doc/packaging-manuals/copyright-format/1.0/  

- **!** Use `SUDO__` scoped environment variable for `tpath` and `apath` functions instead of hardcoded paths  

    Previously, `LD_PRELOAD` set in `rc` files was hardcoded to `/data/data/com.termux` paths, which wouldn't work for a different rootfs.  

    We use `SUDO__` scoped environment variables instead of just `TERMUX_PRIORITY_PATH`, `ANDROID_PRIORITY_PATH`, `TERMUX_PRIORITY_LD_LIBRARY_PATH` and `ANDROID_PRIORITY_LD_LIBRARY_PATH` variables so that they do not conflict with variables set by something else and in the `sudo` environment it is explicitly clear who exported the variables.  

- Do no use `herestring` for command option arrays generated from strings with `xargs` as it creates temp files in `$TMPDIR` which has a performance impact and pass them with a `printf` pipe instead.

- Prepend default rc and history file options passed to interactive shells to the ones passed by `--shell-options` and `--post-shell-options` arguments in case user wants to override them.

- Replace hardcoded `/data/data/com.termux/files/{usr,home}` paths with `$TERMUX__PREFIX` and `~/` and replace `/storage/emulated/0` with `/sdcard`  

    The `/sdcard` should be a symlink to `/storage/self/primary`, which would be a symlink to `/storage/emulated/<user_id>` depending on current user id. This would allow running commands in secondary users.  

- Use `ANDROID__BUILD_VERSION_SDK` exported by Termux app `>= v0.119.0` instead of running `getprop "ro.build.version.sdk"`  

    This will have a performance impact for older versions where variable is not exported  

- Update donation link.

- **!** Refactor to change conventions for variables, comments, indentation and log levels and update tests  

    - All global variables in `sudo` are now uppercase including all the variables in `sudo.config`. The `ADDITIONAL_PATHS_TO_EXPORT`, `EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_PATH_VARIABLE`, `ADDITIONAL_LD_LIBRARY_PATHS_TO_EXPORT` and `EXPORT_ALL_EXISTING_PATHS_IN_LD_LIBRARY_PATH_VARIABLE` variables in `sudo.config` now have the `SUDO_` scope prefix to prevent conflicts, like `SUDO_ADDITIONAL_PATHS_TO_EXPORT`. **Users using `sudo.config` file must update their variables.**  
    - Comments now have a space after the hash `#` character and first letter is uppercase, like `# Comment`.  
    - Indentation has been converted from tabs to 4 spaces.  
    - Log levels are used instead of verbose mode. Log level can also be set by exporting an `int` in `$SUDO_LOG_LEVEL` between `0-3` in addition to increasing it with `-v` flags or setting it to `0` with `-q|--quiet` flags, like `SUDO_LOG_LEVEL=3` to set log level to `VERBOSE=3`.  
    - Tests have been updated to pass, mainly required switching `youtube-dl` to `yt-dlp`.  
    - Fix printing of empty line at start of `sudo --help` output.  

## &nbsp;

&nbsp;



### Fixed

- Use `/system/bin/sh` shell on Android `< 7` if running `asu`/`script` commands with `-A` or `-AA` flags as Termux shells will have linker errors as `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` will not be set.

- Disable calling `tudo_script__killtree` for Android `< 6` as `pgrep` is not available.

- Do not use quiet mode for `funcsave` for `fish` shell on Android `< 7` as `-q` option is not available.

- Use `/proc/self/mounts` to check for magisk system mirror instead of `mount` command in case it is not available in `$PATH`  

    Termux provides `mount` command with `mount-utils` package, which isn't installed by default.  

- Fix conversion of command string to command array by using `bash___shell__set_shell_command_args_array()` function from `libalteran-sh`  

    Current `printf | xargs` pipe will remove empty arguments `''` and globs `*` will expand when output from `xargs` is assigned to the array unless `set -f` (`shopt -so noglob`) has been set before hand, which then needs to be restored if not already set by checking output of `shopt -o noglob` first, which obviously gets complicated.  

    Note that `/system/bin/xargs` does not parse arguments properly and single and double quotes around arguments remain, nor do backslash escapes work, so do not use such characters when calling `sudo` if current shell has `/system/bin` in `$PATH` instead of or before Termux bin path.  

- Use `$TERMUX__PREFIX/lib/libtermux-exec.so` for `LD_PRELOAD` when writing `tpath` function instead of hardcoded `com.termux` absolute path.

- Redirect `stderr` to `stdout`, `stdin` to `/dev/null` for `su` shells (`$SU_ENV_COMMAND`) and put all commands inside a subshell as sometimes exit code is `0` even if last command fails with a non zero exit code and command/output is out of order or stderr is not completely flushed before command exits  

    The reason is unknown at this time, can be tested with `sudo -vv --shell-home=$HOME/.. su`, which should always fail when `sudo_setup_sudo_shell_home_and_working_environment` returns an error and exits with exit code `1`, but doesn't.  

    The issue with this is that since `stderr` is redirected to `stdout`, the `su_output` that's manually logged with `echo` afterwards to `stdout` will contain both normal log entries and the errors, instead of the errors being sent to `stderr`. But this is not too big an issue as an additional error is still logged with `sudo_log_errors` to `stderr` if a command fails.  

- Do not attempt to remount `/system` partition as `rw` for shell home if magisk overlay is being used as it would be `ro` and cannot be remounted.

- Manually `cd` to current working directory in case `su` changes it.

- Fix validation if rootfs `/` is passed as `--work-dir` and do not spend time on setup for it as a working directory and fix already existing rootfs `/` or `/system` subdirectories not allowed on android `>= 10` if passed as `--work-dir`  

    Validation failure was caused because regex being used for validation didn't allow allow rootfs `/` itself and only absolute paths under it.  

- Fix `path` command executing executable symlink target instead of symlink itself and do no execute file relative to current working directory if path does not start with `./` or `../`  

    For `coreutils` and `toybox`, etc, the symlink itself must be executed, like `/system/bin/ls` instead of the executable target, like `/system/bin/toybox`.  

    Previously, if `sudo stat` was executed and a file with the name `stat` existed in current working directory, then it would be executed instead of the one in `$PATH`, which causes nondeterministic behaviour depending on state of current directory. So we do not allow this anymore, if user wants to execute a file in current directory, it must start with `./` or `../`, like `sudo ./stat`. This behaviour is consistent with normal shell behaviour as well.  

- Disable logging of `funcsave: wrote $HOME/.config/fish/functions/[export|unset].sh` by using quiet mode.

---

&nbsp;
